Title: BERKELEY CO OPS
Source: r/berkeley thread, https://www.reddit.com/r/berkeley/comments/1koq3t3/berkeley_co_ops/
Posted: 2025-05-17

Original post:
Yo, i am transferring this fall and considering co ops as a housing option heavily. ( I don't like to cook and get groceries). I am getting Cloyne court or Casa Zimbabwe. If anyone got any insights I am all ears as idk anything about the co ops and the experience. (How is the party to study ratio) Would love to hear your guys experiences too ( or your friends')!

Replies from students:

[6 points] House President for one of the smaller co-ops here.
Each house has an entirely different culture: CZ is a party house, Cloyne isn’t. 
They eat good at CZ tho, I often hear they are making steak or some sort of bbq for their dinners every so often. 
Cloyne is massive, I’m sure the food is also good! Some houses put so much effort in their dinners they even got dessert and once a week brunches. 
In general, there are some houses who make parties a lot of the time, and there are some houses who keep it to themselves and may do socials/parties once in a blue moon.
It depends on what you’re after, but I’d say it gives you a lot of life experience, and you make friends from all over the globe (Bc of the co-ops, I got friends in Chile, South Korea, Spain, Germany, Mexico, France, Poland, Norway, Ireland, and India) 

If you become a manager you also get rent reduction. Once in a summer I did like 5 manager positions because sometimes other co-ops during the summer don’t got enough people to cover manager positions. Anyway with the amount of manager positions I did I got rent covered for an entire year ;)
And the manager positions can be put in your resume and give you so much experience!

It will vary depending on the co-op you choose but I’d say it’s worth it :)

[3 points] Like the others posting here, I am a huge fan of the co-ops. Cloyne and CZ, while definitely 'kin' couldn't be more different. CZ is the party house while Cloyne is substance-free.

The co-ops are an incredible way to find your community. From people who have already been through what you are facing and can help guide you through, to friends you would never have otherwise met, to people who you can help through what they are facing.

There is never a lack of things to do or people to do them with.

[3 points] Nearly all of my favorite memories of undergrad and >90% of my college social life centered around the coop (lothlorien) I was in for 3.5 years. There are obviously downsides (occasional to frequent conflict / lack of privacy / cleanliness), but it can also be a super cool space where you meet a lot of interesting people and always have things to do. I would definitely recommend it, but it is also not for everyone due to how chaotic and messy it can be! Cloyne and CZ are the two biggest houses by far, so you will have a lot of housemates. If you want something smaller or a different house culture, it is pretty straightforward to transfer to a new coop in a future semester

[2 points] I live at cloyne if you have any questions about it! it’s a big house and we have meals every single day. i would highly recommend it