Title: Questions about housing from a new student
Source: r/berkeley thread, https://www.reddit.com/r/berkeley/comments/r01hx/questions_about_housing_from_a_new_student/
Posted: 2012-03-16

Original post:
Hi all, I'll be starting graduate school at Berkeley in August, and I was wondering when the best time to look for housing is. I'd like to move in around the middle of July, or the beginning of August at the latest (trying to time it with my current lease ending). When do the most listings tend to go up on Craigslist? So far I've heard people say that things go up a month or so before their leases start, but I wanted to double check.

I'm also trying to figure out which neighborhoods to look at. A lot of the current grad students I've talked to said they tend to live in north Berkeley around the gourmet ghetto, but I was also considering the Elmwood area. Does anyone recommend against it? I grew up near Berkeley and it's always seemed like a decent neighborhood to me, but I haven't actually lived there so I'd like some input.

Thanks!

Replies from students:

[2 points] I was just about to post this exact same question.  I'm a new graduate student at CED. I've been checking on Craigslist for the past few weeks and I haven't seen anything starting later than June.

I've heard Elmwood is nice and it's definitely where I'll be looking since I need to be on the south side of campus.

[2 points] Obviously the best time to look is right after a large number of students have gone back to wherever they came from. I've lived in the gourmet ghetto for 20 years and love it. Nothing wrong with Elmwood though. They're both nice, but I've always gotten the impression that North Berkeley was safer. I have no statistics to back it up though.

We had a moderate street crime wave that was sweeping through N. Berkeley for quite a while until the police caught a half dozen  people that were supposedly responsible for most of it. We also had a mountain lion that came traipsing through the gourmet ghetto basically through my backyard a year or two ago that caused a shitstorm of protest when the cops shot the hell out it. 

I was born in Oakland and the further away you are the better. People won't like this but it's just my opinion. Just don't move so far north that you end up in Richmond(I went to Richmond High) or San Pablo.

[2 points] Elmwood is nice, but one problem I ran into this year was that pretty much every other grad student lived on Northside, so it was a hassle to get to other people's places.

[2 points] Start looking now, www.padmapper.com is a good source for finding a place to live and you can even overlay a crime map over the area.

[2 points] Thanks, that sounds like a good idea. I am looking for a safe neighborhood, but also one that's quiet. I think I'm done living with rowdy undergrads...

[1 points] Insert plug for the co-ops here.

yay co-ops!

[1 points] I lived in El Sobrante too from about 6-9th grade. It can be a fun place to grow up. But damn, I have no idea we ended with Mettalica from that place. I would have expected more something along the lines of the next Lynyrd Skynyrd. I suppose in the bigger picture of things we did all listen to Led Zep, Montrose, Allman Brios, Queen on our 8-track tapes. 
So many good times going out bear creek road or up wildcat canyon.

[1 points] Yeah I used to live in El Sobrante, so I know I don't want to be in that whole area. I'm hoping to bike/bus to campus, so I want to be relatively close. The grad students I talked to seemed to think North Berkeley was the best place to look, but from what I've seen on Craigslist so far it seems somewhat more expensive.

[1 points] Well, my boyfriend and I are already living on our own together, so I don't think a co-op is what we're looking for. Thanks though. And happy cake day :-)

[1 points] Ah, I was only there until I was 7 years old. My dad used to work in Berkeley so I have a lot of memories of going there with him when I was little, but I do remember spending a fair amount of time at "Cheese Park" behind Valley View elementary school (don't remember what it was actually called).