Title: Safe to live alone in southside
Source: r/berkeley thread, https://www.reddit.com/r/berkeley/comments/1402pj4/safe_to_live_alone_in_southside/
Posted: 2023-06-04

Original post:
I recently moved to a place on southside where I live alone as a female. Today I have read some horror stories about female living alone and now I'm scared... Is anyone living by themselves and how do you usually ensure your safety?

Replies from students:

[87 points] 1) Lock your doors

2) Always make sure you’re not being followed before you enter your home/building

3) Keep something for self-defense by your bed

4) Be aware of your surroundings. If you see someone who looks sus legit cross the street don’t walk past him.

5) Buy a metal water bottle like a Yeti for when ur walking around. One good hit someone is out clean. 

6) Don’t walk around at night alone

7) Plan your routes

[47 points] Yeah I mean the 40s and 50s in America were definitely nice for some people lmfao

[36 points] Get a door lock holder (the type that fit under the handle)

Don't turn on lights near your window immediately after getting inside, otherwise someone who is watching you from outside will know which apartment you entered.

If anyone is dawdling or waiting around near your apartment or on the street, don't cross paths to get to the apartment. I lived on Southside and this happened a few times. I saw a strange person kicking it by himself nearby my apartment. He made eye contact but stayed in place and kept acting erratic. Instead of going to my apartment, I stayed in my car and locked the doors and just waited til he left. He did, but only because he robbed the next girl leaving her car to come in. Three guys jumped her once she entered the building and stole her keys. They tried to steal her car, luckily they got scared and ran off. This same scam is pretty common in Southside. They wait for people to get inside first or cross the street. Once you do, they rob you or try to rob your car.

Get to know your neighbors a little. You can use them for a sense of security and also for heads up if they know of a security concern, and also to watch to see if anyone's messing with your apartment if you're gone for a while. 

Always lock your doors. Your door should have two locks, not just one, and one of them should be a manual lock.

[25 points] Not sure if you're living in an apartment or a room in a house...but I'll assume apartment for the moment.

Regarding locks, Berkeley law, I believe, requires all rental apartments to have deadbolt locks (in addition to any lock that's on the door handle. The deadbolt is the separate lock, usually placed in the door above the handle, that has its own key and is operated from the inside by a little lever).  If yours doesn't have one, you can check with the Rent Stabilization Board online or by email for the exact information on what's required of the owner. 

In addition to the other good advice, I would emphasize *get to know your neighbors*. So many people in apartment buildings in Berkeley live in isolation, both from others in their building and others who live nearby. 

Say "hi" to people in the lobby, elevator (if there is one), in the hallway on your floor, the laundry room, etc.  Say "hi" to neighbors walking their dogs along the sidewalk or tending their gardens along your block. (Dogs are great icebreakers for conversation--people usually love to have you ask questions about and compliment their pet).  If you're worried about talking alone in or near the building to men who are strangers, start by saying hi just to the women you run into. 

They are all potential acquaintances, and maybe some might become friends if you chat enough with them over the coming year.  Also, knowing some people by sight and name in your building will help if there are any problems--there's a power outage, there's an issue with the building management, you (or they) get sick and need something from the grocery store or drugstore, or you feel threatened by something and you just need a place and a person to connect with quickly and nearby.

Also...don't hesitate to talk to older women as neighbors, not just Cal students. Many people feel the only people they can connect with are of their own age group...but all those older women in Berkeley have interesting life experiences *and empathy*. Most of them were also young college students once upon a time (many permanent Berkeley residents went to Cal, and stayed on to live and work in the area), and a lot of them will have specific past experiences, both good and bad, that can be a reservoir of advice and support for you. 

Good luck in your new independent living situation!

[14 points] Pepper spray is one of the most effective weapons around.

[13 points] it's so sad that we live in such a low trust society. I watched a video of San Francisco in the 40s/50s and it was such a nice place. I hope the bay area can be as beautiful as it once was some day soon

[11 points] Thanks for the advice! For those robberies where they wait for ppl to get inside then rob, do they do that during daytime when it's still very bright?

[7 points] In the 40s? Really? I don’t doubt that there were some minority neighborhoods that were good but it was still extremely segregated, lots of redlining, etc

[6 points] Just have a pepper spray and be aware of your surroundings. This sub has many scary stories but is far from accurately representing the real experiences of a Berkeley student.

[5 points] Prison weapon. Get a sock and buys some big padlocks. Put it in the sock then swing it. It should work most of the time. Aim for the face or the knees. Also don't be out late at night. If you see someone staring at you from a car run away. If it's a one way run back up away from their and force them to reverse. A dog like a pitbull or kangal could help. Also have common sense and don't necessarily seem scared. Seem like you're willing to take it somewhere violent if you need to. Most people won't mess with people who seem tough. Another note bad people are likely to target the weakest people and the path of least resistance.

[4 points] im a woman living with two other women in south side, and we’ve had some scares. always take bearwalk if bus is too long of a wait or too far of a walk. if you have any male friends, ask them to walk you if they can. keep your doors locked and keep pepper spray handy. in times where i felt like i was being followed, i’d cross the street and turn around, then turn back around (if they’re still there, it’s a follow). if someone IS following you, go inside a shop or business and stay there (subtly let them know you need help if the business owners get skeptical).

[4 points] I’m not sure women would be safe walking alone during the day or night in the 40s or 50s, especially in San Francisco.

[3 points] If you get pepper spray, don't just keep it in your backpack. When a situation arises you'll never reach that fast enough. I have it on the strap of my backpack, always within reach.

[3 points] There are no rules in Berkeley, and there will be no relief.

[3 points] No other weapon comes close to being as effective with little to no training or skill. You push a button and 99% of attackers are going to be on the ground crying and gasping for air pretty much immediately. 


It's got range and an area of effect so you don't need to have perfect aim. You can keep your finger on the button while it's in your hand and mostly conceal it so you're ready at a moment's notice. So you can respond faster than with a pistol unless you have a pocket holster and a very small gun or huge pockets. You can't walk around with a gun in your hand (legally.)


It also marks the attacker so even if they manage to get away they'll be easier to identify. Mace is the perfect urban weapon for anyone that doesn't have the time or money to dedicate to getting proficient enough with a firearm for it to be effective in a confrontation.

[3 points] Nothing in life is guaranteed, but it's perfectly reasonable to live alone as a female. Just use some common sense and establish safe habits: 

- Always be aware of your surroundings. Don't walk around with earbuds in looking at your phone--I can't believe how often I see this, and those folks look like walking targets. Don't flash valuables. Walk with purpose. If someone seems sketchy, avoid them but don't run (unless you have to).

- Get to know your neighbors. They can be a great resource if you need help of any kind, and it will probably give you a good deal of psychological reassurance to know who's around you.

- Take a self-defense class. A lot of people will tell you to get pepper spray or whatnot, but getting some real training in how to use it and other defense techniques will make it much more likely that you'll use it effectively.

[2 points] It sure has changed…gotten worse, I reckon

[2 points] They have door jams that you can put on the inside once you’re in the house. Easily bought on Amazon.

[1 points] Im an incoming transfer and I was planning on getting an apartment on southside too! I'm a 200lbs male bodybuilder tho, but regardless all the robberies and assaults still make me very concerned :(

[1 points] It’s really not that bad. Just make sure you lock up when ur inside and out. Don’t talk to strangers get some pepper spray and stay alert &amp; you’ll be fine. Probably won’t ever have to use it. The neighborhood in south berkeley has changed a lot and I’ve noticed less crime